Point:
* Tool not most important, Focus in Communication, busness thinking, product.



------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------
First, here is my list of all skills I might want to see for this position:

Academic
CS coursework
Stats and linear algebra
Some ML coursework, covering at least
regression
classification
clustering
recommendation
graphical models

Data Collection Tools
Hadoop-based tools like Flume / Sqoop
Text munging languages like Python, or maybe Perl
Basic SQL

Data Modeling Tools
A library like scipy / numpy or Weka
A tool like R (or commercial equivalents like SAS, SPSS)

Model Serving Tools
(Ideally) some familiarity with PMML
Basic knowledge of a NoSQL store
Systems language skill, like Java

Business Smarts
Communication skills
Some facility with a visualization tool, even if gnuplot or Excel
Domain knowledge relevant to my business

You certainly don't need all of that. In fact, for an internship, you can't be
expected to have most of it. I assume you are in school, so I would expect you
to have much of the academic background, and would like to see that you have
some of the tool skills. I would not expect business skills, but believe me,
communication skills are a big differentiator.


So what to focus on? First, academics. If I were interviewing you I would
probably ask about this as a filter. If you're not able to explain the very
basics, like what linear regression does, that means there's a big lack of
either knowledge or communication skills. So I would feel comfortable with the
very basics. I'd ask you to explain one moderately advanced algorithm and why
it works, of your choice. Same reasoning, if you can't pick something out of
everything you know to explain reasonably, probably not going to proceed.

Unfortunately I do think a lot of interviews focus too much on the math and
algorithms like it was an exam. I would not want to work at places that think
that's the important thing. I personally would want to see that you're smart
and communicate well and know the basics. Chances are that whatever math is
relevant to my business is something you'll need to learn (more) anyway.


I know you're asking about tools though. The tools that are relevant really
depend on the kind of place you're applying. A classic research department is
going to focus mostly on modeling tools. Since you can't get SAS / SPSS easily,
focus on R and Weka as a skill.

At the other end of the spectrum, say, a small startup, the requirement is
broader and shallower. They won't need you to know R. They will need you to
quickly understand a business problem and put together a production-ready
system to solve it. So it's much more about data collection, munging, a little
modeling, and then integration. For that I would make sure you know how to get
data out of a DB or log files, into a modeling tool, and then how to transform
a model into some code someone could put in a web server. So: basic SQL, Python
or Java, and whatever DB / web serving tools the company uses.


Kaggle is great practice although it will not 'test' your data collection
skills or the serving side of things. But it will challenge you to understand a
business problem, munge real data and model it. I would look favorably on an
intern who had taken the time to solve a Kaggle problem and done reasonably
well.
